# Dynamic Programming

- Usually, problems where you use DP can only be solved with DP (in a reasonable time complex
- If you don't know DP, then it is almost impossible to solve a DP problem, even if it's an easy one

- dynamic programming is just optimized recursion
- The arguments that a recursive function takes represents a state.
- The difference with DP is that states can be repeated, usually an exponential number of times. To avoid repeating computation, we use something called memoization. When we find the answer (the return value) for a given state, we cache that value (usually in a hash map). Then in the future, if we ever see the same state again, we can just refer to the cached value without needing to re-calculate it.

```
var fibonacci = function(n) {
    if (n == 0) {
        return 0;
    }

    if (n == 1) {
        return 1;
    }

    return fibonacci(n - 1) + fibonacci(n - 2);
}
```

- This algorithm has a time complexity of O(2^n)

```
/**
 * @param {number} n
 * @return {number}
 */
var fibonacci = function(n) {
    if (n == 0) {
        return 0;
    }

    if (n == 1) {
        return 1;
    }

    if (memo.has(n)) {
        return memo.get(n);
    }

    memo.set(n, fibonacci(n - 1) + fibonacci(n - 2));
    return memo.get(n);
}

let memo = new Map();
```

- This improves our time complexity to O(n) - which is, of course, extremely fast compared to O(2^n). The first approach is just basic recursion - by memoizing results to avoid duplicate computation, it becomes dynamic programming.

## Top Down

- This method of using recursion and memoization is also known as "top-down" dynamic programming
- Another way to approach a dynamic programming problem is with a "bottom-up" algorithm. In bottom-up, we start at the bottom (base cases) and work our way up to larger problems. This is done iteratively and also known as tabulation. Here is the bottom-up version of Fibonacci:

```
/**
 * @param {number} n
 * @return {number}
 */
var fibonacci = function(n) {
    let arr = new Array(n + 1).fill(0);
    // base case - the second Fibonacci number is 1
    arr[1] = 1;
    for (let i = 2; i <= n; i++) {
        arr[i] = arr[i - 1] + arr[i - 2];
    }

    return arr[n];
}
```

- Top-down and bottom-up refer only to how you decide to implement your algorithm. There is fundamentally nothing different between the two approaches. Every top-down implementation can be implemented bottom-up and vice versa. The things that define a DP algorithm are the base cases and recurrence relation (which we will talk about more in the next article).

- Usually, a bottom-up implementation is faster. This is because iteration has less overhead than recursion, although this is less impactful if your language implements tail recursion.
- However, a top-down approach is usually easier to write. With recursion, the order that we visit states does not matter. With iteration, if we have a multidimensional problem, it can sometimes be difficult figuring out the correct configuration of your for loops.

## is it DP problem?

- The problem will be asking for an optimal value (max or min) of something or the number of ways to do something.
- At each step, you need to make a "decision", and decisions affect future decisions.

- The second characteristic is usually what differentiates greedy and DP. The idea behind greedy is that local decisions do not affect other decisions.

## Step

- first step to creating DP algorithms is deciding on what state variables are necessary.
- The number of state variables used is the dimensionality of an algorithm. For example, if an algorithm uses only one variable like i, then it is one dimensional. If a problem has multiple state variables, it is multi-dimensional. Some problems might require as many as five dimensions.

## time and space complexity

- Complexity analysis for DP algorithms is very easy. Like with trees/graphs, we calculate each state only once. Therefore, if there are N possible states, and the work done at each state is F, then your time complexity will be O(N \* F). Notice that this is the exact same argument we used in the tree and graph problems.

- In many problems, the space complexity can be improved when implementing bottom-up, but not top-down. We'll see this in the rest of the chapter.
