# Graphs

- Graphs are part of our everyday lives. Without even trying too hard, you can model literally anything as a graph.

## terminology

- Edges of a node can either be directed or undirected.
- In binary trees, the edges were directed. Binary trees are directed graphs.
- In binary trees, there must only be one connected component
- In binary trees, all nodes except the root had an indegree of 1 (due to their parent). All nodes have an outdegree of 0, 1, or 2. An outdegree of 0 means that it is a leaf. Specific to trees, we used the parent/child terms instead of "neighbors".
- A graph can be either cyclic or acyclic.

## how are graphs given in an algorithm

- In linked list problems, the head of the linked list is given. In binary tree problems, the root of the tree is given
- An important thing to understand is that with linked lists and binary trees, you are literally given objects in memory that contain data and pointers. With graphs, the graph doesn't literally exist in memory.
- In fact, only the "idea" of the graph exists.
- The problem statement may or may not explicitly state the input is a graph. Sometimes there might be a story, and you need to determine that the input is a graph

1. Array of edges

- example: `edges = [[0, 1], [1, 2], [2, 0], [2, 3]]`
- In this input format, the input will be a 2D array. Each element of the array will be in the form [x, y], which indicates that there is an edge between x and y
- At every node, we would need to iterate over the entire input to find the neighbors. This is very slow!
- Before starting the traversal, we can pre-process the input so that we can easily find all neighbors of any given node
- The easiest way to accomplish this is using a hash map.

```
let buildGraph = edges => {
    let graph = new Map();
    for (const [x, y] of edges) {
        if (!graph.has(x)) {
            graph.set(x, []);
        }

        graph.get(x).push(y);

        // if (!graph.has(y)) {
        //     graph.set(y, []);
        // }

        // graph.get(y).push(x);
        // uncomment the above lines if the graph is undirected
    }
}
```

2. adjacency list

- example: `graph = [[1], [2], [0, 3], []]`
- The input will be a 2D integer array.
- graph[i] will be a list of all the outgoing edges from the ith node.
- most convenient format

3. adjacency matrix

- example: `graph = [[0, 1, 0, 0], [0, 0, 1, 0], [1, 0, 0, 1], [0, 0, 0, 0]]`
- 2D matrix of size n x n
- if graph[i][j] == 1, that means there is an outgoing edge from node i to node j
- can build hashmap to see all neighbors of a node else will have to iterate over the entire row

4. matrix

- more subtle but very common
- The input will be a 2D matrix and the problem will describe a story
- In this case, each square (row, col) of the matrix is a node, and the neighbors are (row - 1, col), (row, col - 1), (row + 1, col), (row, col + 1)

## code diff b/w graphs and trees

- While a binary tree has a root node to start traversal from, a graph does not always have an obvious "start" point.
- in a graph, we might need to convert the input into a hash map first. When traversing a tree, we refer to node.left and node.right at each node. When traversing a graph, we will need to use a for loop to iterate over the neighbors of the current node, since a node could have any number of neighbors
- To prevent cycles and unnecessarily visiting a node more than once, we can use a set seen. Before we visit a node, we first check if the node is in seen. If it isn't, we add it to seen before visiting it. This allows us to only visit each node once in O(1) time because adding and checking for existence in a set takes constant time.
