# Backtracking

- The most brute force way to solve a problem is through exhaustive search.
- Backtracking is an optimization that involves abandoning a "path" once it is determined that the path cannot lead to a solution (Abandoning a path is also sometimes called "pruning".)

## why it works

- In an exhaustive search, we generate all possibilities and then check them for solutions. In backtracking, we prune paths that cannot lead to a solution, generating far fewer possibilities.
- Backtracking is a great tool whenever a problem wants you to find all of something, or there isn't a clear way to find a solution without checking all logical possibilities. On LeetCode, a strong hint that you should use backtracking is if the input constraints are very small (n <= ~15), as backtracking algorithms usually have exponential time complexities.

```
function backtrack(curr) {
    if (base case) { // 1.
        Increment or add to answer
        return
    }

    for (iterate over input) {
        Modify curr
        backtrack(curr)

    }
}
```

## tree analogy

- think of it like working in a tree
- Each call to the function backtrack represents a node in the tree. Each iteration in the for loop represents a child of the current node, and calling backtrack in that loop represents moving to a child
- The line where you undo the modifications is the "backtracking" step and is equivalent to moving back up the tree from a child to its parent.
- At any given node, the path from the root to the node represents a candidate that is being built. The leaf nodes are complete solutions and represent when the base case is reached.

## common type of problems - Generation

- generate all of something

Given their exponential solution space, it is tricky to ensure that the generated solutions are complete and non-redundant. It is essential to have a clear and easy-to-reason strategy.

There are generally three strategies to do it:

Recursion

Backtracking

Lexicographic generation based on the mapping between binary bitmasks and the corresponding permutations / combinations / subsets.

As one would see later, the third method could be a good candidate for the interview because it simplifies the problem to the generation of binary numbers, therefore it is easy to implement and verify that no solution is missing.

Besides, as a bonus, it generates lexicographically sorted output for the sorted inputs.
