# Requirements

## functional

- behavior (what system is supposed to do)

## non-functional

- quality of system (how system is supposed to be)

- if interviewer gives ambiguous problem
  - my reply should be the problem seems too big
  - let me try to define specific functions and reduce the scope

### Questions to ask yourself

- do we need to scale for writes or reads?
- both

  - to scale for writes
    - partition messages and store in separate queues
    - which partition strategy to use?
      - maybe hash is okay
  - where do i store quickly?
    - in memory (bounded queue or disk) or in disk (append-only log or an embedded database)
      - if database
        - should i pick b-tree or lsm tree?
          - more probably lsm as such dbs are faster for writes
  - to scale for read
    - paritioning will help here too. we will have consumer per partition
    - should i use pull or push for reading messages?
      - if i go with pull, i need to make sure system supports long polling to decrease number of read requests

- how to get high availability

  - i need to replicate messages
  - leaderbased or leaderless replication?
    - most likely leader based, but then i need to solve leader election problem
      - that should be easy i can use coordination service or a DB that guarantees strong consistency

- how to make system reliable

  - i need some protection mechanisms (load shedding, rate limiting, maybe shuffle sharding)
  - should i use reverse proxy - maybe
    - it will take care partition discovery and message routing

- how to make it fast?

  - i should consider batching and compressing

## Actions

- write the functional and non-functional requirements. keep a list.
- higher the item in the list, more important it is

## Conclusion

when you know what concepts exist to address what requirements, you are much better set for a meaningful discussion with interviewer
